Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform.
One more thing. Let me
tell you about a new
sponsor Reagan. If you're wanting
to detect and diagnose errors
and crashes in your software,
even find problems that you
didn't know existed to improve
your software and Ray gun
might be perfect for you.
You had a few lines
of code your application, and
in minutes, you'll get real
time error reports with all
the information that you need
to fix bugs fast, you
can even hook it up
to your team chat, bug
tracking development, workflow tools, Reagan
covers all major web and
mobile programming languages, including.net, the
full Xamarin stack JavaScript, and
many more. Go check out
Reagan today@reagan.io. I use this
myself on my little startup
and I really, really recommend
this product. It is a
great, great product. Check it
out. Ray gun@reagan.io.  From
hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
four 71. In this episode,
Scott talks with dr. Danielle Smith
about usability and the human
factor. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I am talking with dr.
Danielle Smith from Sentier strategic resources.
She has a PhD in
psychology with a focus on
human factors. You are in
a UX Expert. Yes, I
am. Scott. Thank you. I
really appreciate talking to you.
And I'm going to put
in the show notes more
information about, about Sentier and
about the things that you've
written up, but you've been
exploring this space for a
great deal of time, trying
to make the experience better
for the, for the user,
right? You work for the
user you're like Tron. Yeah,
I do. The thing about
UX is it's such a
broad field that I sorta,
I feel like I always
have to have this disclaimer,
is that I really focus
on the psychology of things.
So I do a lot
of research. I do a
little bit of design, but
nothing I've ever designed has
just gone out into the
public. There's another there's other
parts of UX that make
things more polished and more
attractive, Right? There's a difference
between someone that is, you
know, dragging the button and
saying the bevels should be
like this and the color
theme should be like that.
But you're saying that what
you focus on is this
user experience is quantifiably more
effective than user experience be?
Yes, most of the time,
the thing about it is,
you know, it's a little
bit of art, a little
bit of science, and sometimes
we can quantify it. And
sometimes we can't, but we
use the idea of these,
this, the way that humans
operate. So like you said,
I have a degree in
psychology. So humans think this
way, they perceive things this
way. So we use that
to say that in times
that we can't quantify things
to say that this one
is likely to be better.
So How often in computer
interactions in UX interactions does
culture matter? Like does a
Canadian interact with a website
different than, than a Mexican
or a European? Not very
often, surprisingly enough. Like a
lot of times we go
into things thinking that culture
matters a lot, but it's
hard to predict honestly. So
we ended up testing a
lot of times testing things
anyway, or releasing them out
into the wild and monitoring
them to see if culture
matters. But a lot of
times it doesn't. And then
when it does matter, it
matters in weird ways. What's
a, what's a weird way
that culture would matter. My
favorite example is trying to
deliver a survey. Like you
try to, you design your
survey instrument, you test it
to make sure all the
words are right. You translated
into let's say Chinese and
then launch it. And you're
like, Oh, everybody in China
is really happy about this
product. So much more than
everybody in the United States, when
really it's just, people use
scales differently. Culture dictates the
way people use scales. Interesting.
I can imagine Americans being
like one that sucks, but
that should just, you know,
the Chinese might be like,
I really don't want to
hurt those people's feelings. So
I'll say seven. My favorite
thing to do is to
test things in Germany because
you kind of get the
no, In my, in my
mind I was like nine,
so that's good, right? No,
that is not good. We
suck in Germany. Okay. So
if, if culture doesn't matter
now that was geographic culture.
But what about like, you
know, products for salespeople and
business people versus for nontechnical
parent? You know, that psychology
is significant. Yes, it is
very much so. So that's
actually one of the fields
that I specialize in and
sort of decision making under,
under uncertainty. And when people
are less technically savvy, you,
they make more guesses. Even
though they may not know
they're making guesses. So you
want to have really strong,
clear affordances, so like clear
direction as to what they
should do versus lots of
options. But when you're designing
for a business setting where
people, certain expectations about tasks
that they want to be
able to do, you try
to design more flexibility, but
still people are people you
give them too many options,
they'll make guesses. And so
you have to balance that
very carefully. That, that phrase,
I really liked that decision
making under uncertainty. I feel
like I come in into
situation with my nontechnical parents
where they're like, you know,
I did something to the
computer. Like they, they reflexively
feel that whatever went wrong
with that survey or that
website or this check deposit
was my fault. Yes. And
I, as a usability, as
a person who does a
lot of usability testing, I
find myself reassuring people. Don't
worry. It's not your fault.
It's the computer's fault, but
people do. They internalize it.
They want, believe it or
not, most people want, most
people want the thing that
they bought to work. And
so they tend to get
mad at themselves because they
don't want to think they
are wrong and think expecting
the single word. Yeah. I
had a lot of really
uncomfortable conversations about windows eight
and the, the issue was,
is it not usable or
is it unfamiliar? Because fast
forward two years from now,
you know, two years into
the present right now, most
people that I talked to
that have used windows eight
for years are quite comfortable
with it. So then it
was the fact that it
was unfamiliar that made us
assume it was unintuitive. And
that got me to thinking
like, is the only reason
that the start menu makes
sense is because it's been
around for 25 years. Yeah.
That's the hard thing. Like
every time that something, a
new paradigm comes in, comes
up, you have to think
about it that way. Like,
is it really something about
the interface that makes it
not fit for human consumption
or is it just the
newness of it? So once
I did a lot of
work for keyboard with keyboards.
So whenever you change a
keyboard, especially with a business
and a business setting with
touch typist, people are angry,
like key cap height. How,
why they are like, no
matter how much analysis we
do to show that it's
re result in less stress,
or it's more, you don't
have any more or less
errors using the new keyboard.
People are angry. So you
kind of have to wait
and see if they adapt
to the, the new idea.
I think that users get
deeply attached to their computers.
You know, like when you
move someone's cheese, they will
freak out because this is
where they live. Right. And
they don't really care about
you. They don't care about
your computer. They, they live
here. They are just trying
to live. And if some
new, some new design comes
along, that is ultimately better
for one reason or another.
If the user doesn't perceive
that right away there, they
have no motivation. I noticed
that on, on the iPad,
on iPads and in the
world of people now, as
we're several years into that
world are convinced the tablets
are completely intuitive, but it
seems to me that we
spend a lot of time
with applications that would dim
out the entire screen and
have a shadow hand saying
touch there. If, if tablets
were that intuitive, I don't
think that every iPad app
wouldn't have a first run
experience. It was like, touch
here. Exactly. Like I had
that experience, like I gave
my grandmother a tablet a
couple of months ago and
I tried to get her
to call me on Skype.
And I was like, just
press the camera icon. And
she's like, what? Camera icon?
There is no camera icon.
Oh, you mean this rectangle
with a triangle next to
it. Oh, okay. It's like,
Oh right. Yeah. Even now
today, like Android phones, I
still haven't figured out what
the three icons at the
bottom are. Like, one of
them's kind of shaped like
a monopoly house. So I
think it means home, but
the other ones I have
and the hamburger, what is
the hamburger? You, what I'm
talking about? The three lines,
like that's now become a
thing I know. And no
matter how many studies that
wonderful UX people do and
publish that, say that performance
is so much better. If
you have the word that
says menu versus a hamburger,
we're continuing to push that.
And it remains to be
seen as if like in
five years, my grandma will
be like, Oh yeah, I
just hit the hamburger. And
it works. I don't think
grandma knows it's called a
hamburger. And one of my
most popular blog posts is
the one that an entire
generation of people are pushing
on the save icon without
even having ever seen a
floppy disk. Oh yeah. So
you say that studies have
come out that say that
the hamburger does not perform
as well as a simple
button marked menu. Then where
is the disconnect between you
who have the knowledge and
the data and the scholarly
research to prove that this
is a bad idea. And
as you mentioned earlier, kind
of downstream some designer overrode
you and said, no, no
hamburgers are prettier. Well kind
of the same reason that
blue Ray exists, you know,
there is a larger business
vision that human factors, people
and UX people do have
to fit into. And if,
as an industry like, Oh,
hamburgers are prettier, but they
also save us space. And
they response when you go
responsive, it works a lot
better than we do make
some tradeoffs. And as long
as people don't fail, you
know, can't complete the main
task of, you know, checking
out or saving their document
or whatever it is, then
we will go ahead and
make other allowances. I think
one of the other challenges
about UX is that once
you've poisoned the user, by
teaching them that those three
lines are the menu, well,
then now they're poisoned. And
then they're no longer a
fresh person that you can
introduce this concept to. Now
I can't get any valid
data out of this person.
They know that already. Yeah.
The hard thing is that
a lot of, it's hard
to know when they know.
So just because someone's used
something, they may not even
remember that that's the way
it happened. Because like I
said, they don't really care
about your thing. They care
about the thing they're trying
to do. So you'll see
a lot of research where
you'll have someone do a
task. So I'll have someone
go check out with their
phone, at a coffee shop
and with some new app
that I've downloaded to their
device. And at the end
of the session, or at
the end of the task,
they will tell me, so
how did it, how did
I go? And they will
describe something completely different than
what happened, because they don't
really care. They just want
it, the coffee that I
was giving them for free
for using the app. So
I will observe and watch
the way they handle things
and note what needs to
change. But when we have
them recall, they don't necessarily
remember the experience. That is
interesting. So that's why you
record these things from multiple
angles and the screen and
all that information. Right. I
think that also, once people
have done something a few
times, there's a, there's a
kinesthetic aspect of things where
the physicality of it, like,
I don't even know how
to make a new mail
in Gmail anymore. I just
go all tab and then
see, and then start typing,
you know, like I don't
even see the compose button
anymore. I get tunnel vision.
Exactly. Like the classic example
of that is that, do
you know how to drive?
Can you describe the small
micro movements you make when
you drive? Oh, wow. Okay.
And I bet that if
you ask someone to give
you a recipe, they would
miss a step is what
you're saying. Yeah. They would
miss a step. They would
not think about, you know,
how they let their foot
off the gas or how
they move their hands. When
they turn the wheel, they
wouldn't necessarily remember all of
that. That's interesting. You know,
I just realized as I'm
running through the steps in
my head, I didn't even
think about, you have to
push the brake before you
turn the car on. Yes.
I actually had to drive
to pick up a friend.
I had to drive like
two miles. They called me
the car. Won't start the
car. Won't start. This is
a person who'd been driving
for 20 years. For whatever
reason on that random Tuesday
morning, they forgot that they
had to push the brake
to start the car. So
they were sitting there with
two feet on the ground
trying to start this car
and they couldn't figure it
out. And I said, well,
here put your foot here.
Oh, like you've been driving
for 20 years. What is
wrong with you? Okay. Or
like people, people have never
filled up their gas tank.
It's amazing to watch them
at gas stations. Hey, now
I live in Oregon and
it is illegal to pump
your own gas here. You
don't even know this. No,
I did not. Oregon has
no sales tax and it
has a no where you
physically not allowed it is
illegal to fill your tank.
So when I very first,
you know, my first drive
up to Washington, I just
sat there for like 20
minutes and then wasn't going
to come and help me
out. And even now true
story, I am still not
a hundred percent sure if
I'm doing it right. Yes.
Yeah. It's amazing that things
that you kind of take
for granted, and that's one
of the reasons why I'm
kind of my profession exists,
right? Because developers, designers, hardware
manufacturers, they do their thing
really well. Right? You are
responsible to make sure that
my computer does not blow
up and it works, but
you sort of take it.
You forget about the bits
of the experience that you,
you take for granted. Well,
I think that also people
think that UX is at
the beginning of a very
long waterfall. When I think
it's more of a cycle.
And I think that we
as software developers, I know
myself rarely at the end
of the waterfall, when the
product has shipped, feed that
data back to you. Like
that's what you need. There's
a cycle of improvement here.
And for so many large
systems, there's massive amounts of
data that are simply not
being collected that you probably
could be using to make
the experience better. Oh, definitely.
That's so one of the
things about human factors, as
opposed to some other sort
of more targeted experience or
fields, is that we tend
to look at the broader
system and at different places
I work, they really do
look at me like, Oh,
okay, you're there for the
beginning. You know, when it's
on paper or when it's
just the UI and it's
not hooked up to the
bag, but you get the
most amount or you get
a lot of information at
that point, but you get
a lot of good information
when it's out in the
field. So like, how do
things fail? Where do the,
where does the funnel kind
of break down? And then
what sort of calls are
you getting? Like customer service
is sort of the richest
untapped bit of UX refinement,
potential that's out there because
that's when you find out,
you know, what kinds of
people have problems because maybe
we didn't think that they
were part of our target
target audience. So we didn't
even test with them in
the beginning. You find out
what they're trying to do.
Cause again, we, we start
off with sort of a
core set of assumed tasks
and folks might be trying
to do something completely different
or in an environment that
we didn't think about. And
so we have this opportunity
to actually grow, to grow
the experience as well as
refine that, if that makes
sense. Do you, do you
think that that large companies
are dropping the ball, that
they are missing this opportunity
to grow the experience? Yeah,
I do. I feel like
they're doing, there's a lot
of good initiatives out there
that are trying to close
this loop. There's lots of
companies that have like customer
experience programs, but they don't
necessarily talk to the UX
team. That is a different
organization. It's run sometimes out
of quality sometimes out of
customer service, but that loop
back is something that's missing.
So like when you deal
with a large corporation, you're
most of the time painfully
aware of that, they'll try
it. You'll buy some new
product, have a bat, have
a problem call in and
they know nothing about you.
Even though like some of
these companies should know a
lot about you. So your
cable provider, for example, you're
having a problem you call
in and they have to
ask you what's, what's the,
what's the name on the
front of your cable box?
It's like, wait a minute.
Then you ship this to
me. Why do you not
know what this is? So
I feel like large companies
have a lot of resources
and a lot of data
that they can be using
to kind of close that
loop and make things continuously
better. I want to take
a moment to thank our
sponsors, sync, fusion, sync fusions,
mobile web, and desktop controls
are trusted worldwide, but did
you know that they also
provide educational resources? The succinctly
series of free eBooks has
great content on popular technologies
and 100 completely ad-free pages.
These books are written by
industry experts and topics range
from Cassandra to no JS
to windows 8.1. They are
available for Kindle apps and
in PDF format and new
eBooks are released each month.
So browse their library@syncfusion.com to
download your free ebook today.
It seems like, is the
problem organizational willpower? I mean,
you just described something simple.
Like I know that it's
always a joy when I
call customer support and they,
they say, hello Scott, because
they saw the caller ID
and their, their, you know,
CRM system loaded my name
up. And they're like, Oh,
are you calling about this?
The issue I called about
three hours ago, I'm like,
Oh, you actually care about
me. But customers were like,
the first five minutes of
the call is just figuring
out who the heck I
am. It's like, y'all don't
care. And that must mean
your CEO and leadership don't
care. Right. And that's what
you, that's the way you
feel. And that's the way
I feel when I call.
But I feel like a
lot of it is sometimes
it's organizational will. Yes. It
may be some older company
with an older mantra of
this is the way things
go. But a lot of
the times it's just large
companies are like working in
a city. Like you don't
know what you don't know.
You know, you work in
this department and these are
your responsibilities. You don't know
that you need to take
the initiative personally to go
out and meet the heads
of all these other departments
and see how, what they
do affects your work. And
honestly, you're not necessarily rewarded
for that. Cause you have
your own goals. Your manager
has their own goals and
processes are put in place
to sort of stifle that.
Exactly. I've always said that
if it's not your job,
then it's not your job.
It's not your job. So
if it's not anybody's job
that doesn't get done. So
then that means that a
large company, like, you know,
an at and T or
progressive insurance or someone big
like that, they should have
a, a for lack of
a better word, a UX
czar who is looking at
that 50,000 foot view and
trying to fix the problems
like they should practice calling
in as a customer and
see what that experience is.
Make sure everyone reminds themselves
what that experience is like.
Yeah. Ideally they would have
that because seeing what that
experience is like, and then
trying to solve that problem
internally, like the UXR both
has to look outside of
what the customer is like,
what customer experience is like
as well as inside to
see what it's like for
a designer to try to
fix that problem. Like trying
to find that data that
you need to see, like
who's calling the customer service.
Like what's the problem, what's
the dropoff rate or anything
like that. It's really hard
to do from inside of
a company, which is not
necessarily intuitive. There's this equation
to tell how many habitable
planets there are. Have you
ever heard about this? This
equation? It is called the,
what is the name of
this? I'll have to look
this up, but basically it's
one of these equations where
they say, we're going to
estimate how many aliens there
are in the, in the,
in the world. And they
go and they'll say, all
right, we'll start with the
average number of stars and
the average. And it's, it's
a sales pipeline. But the
thing that's so interesting about
it is that if you
change even one variable, like
the fraction of life supporting
planets, the number can be,
yeah, there's one planet or
yeah, there's a billion planets.
And the same thing happens
with regard to UX and
a sales pipeline, like one
confusing form on how to
put your credit card in
and you can have 50%
dropoff and people just like
give up. Right. It is
crazy. But yeah, I need
that. I need that formula.
I need to start using
it. Yeah. I, I feel
like the data did I,
do I have data about
abandoned shopping carts? Yes. That's
probably not even collected And
not in every case. Like
that's something I learned by
working at different companies is
that the data is not
even there all the time.
Like you have to make
the conscious effort as the
product manager, as the developer
to instrument this page, this
feature or whatever. And yeah,
So that's called the, the
Drake equation. It turns out
it's the, it's the way
to estimate the number of,
of active extraterrestrial civilizations in
the Milky way galaxy. And
that is a sales pipeline,
you know, isn't it. And
it can change drastically with
just a little bit of
drop-off. If somebody fails to
put in their credit card,
then you know, your sales
go down by 10 20,
you know, some measurable, significant
percentage. Yeah. I think I
need to start using that
equation too. Yeah. I think
you should develop your own.
We'll have the Smith equation
and it will be an
explanation of, you know, UX
errors and issues and all
those little tiny it's like
death by a thousand cuts.
Yeah. Over time. That's the
problem. Or you had an
experience. We were talking earlier
before the show about something
you had trouble with at
and T you know, an
example of a really large
company. Yeah. Actually I have,
I have at and T
Uverse, internet and cable about
an hour. I mean, about
a year into this journey
with, at and T I
started to have a beeping
noise in my garage. So
I call them and say,
Hey, there's something with your
name on it. That's beeping
in my garage. That's a
reasonable question. Mean, you know,
me I've you installed all
this stuff. So their response
is, Oh, well you you're,
it's your battery that powers
your voiceover IP system. We
only supply the first battery.
You have to buy the
second one. Would you like
us to ship you one
and charge you for it?
And I was like, and
my response was, no, I
do not have voice over
IP with you. And you
know, 20 minutes worth of
getting transferred, they come back.
I was like, Oh no,
you do not have voice
over IP. However, you must
have had voiceover IP last
year when we installed this
system, I was like, no,
I have never had voice
over IP through a T
and T. So 20 more
minutes worth of transferring. And
you know, my husband's getting
frustrated at Saturday. I was
like, I don't know what's
going on. And finally it
was, Oh, no, sorry. You
have voice over IP. I
don't know how we don't
know that you have voiceover
IP, but the only way
we can make the beeping
stop in your garage is
for you to pay for
a technician to come out
and take some time. So
you never paid for a
voice over IP. Do you
know who put that box
in there? Yeah, it was
at and T, but like
they tell you like, Oh,
by the way, we're throwing
a voice over IP box
in your car. No, they
were like, Oh, this is
part of what you verse
is for your neighborhood. This
is all the things we
have to do. The guy
had been in my house
for like eight hours. I'm
sure he just wanted to
put everything as possible. Well,
so you have basically a
bunch of unwanted unused equipment
in anticipation perhaps of some
day than you would, you
know, maybe use voice over
IP maybe, But luckily I'm
married to an electrician who
was able to make the
beeping stop and we still
have internet. Yeah. I had
a similar issue with, with
files where it was one
of those situations where they're
telling me that something is
so right. This is an
example where they're in a
CRM system and they said,
no, but dr. Smith, this
is so it says right
here in the CRM, like,
no, you don't understand I'm
in the garage. Right? Like
you don't get to argue
with me. I don't care
what your CRM says. That
cable that you're asking me
to pull, or that object
that you say is not
beeping, is sitting right here.
Let me hold the phone
up to it. It's and
it's always some failure for
some piece of data that
is coming through that process.
And it seems to me
like this should have been
solved with data. Something was
disconnected between the time the
person installed it. And then
when they put it in
their system and made it
data And it, it happens
all the time. Right. And
it makes you feel like
there needs to be some
sort of what makes me
feel like there needs to
be some sort of system
integration test, right? Where the
human is part of the
system, there's different levels of
involvement and you just see
how it goes. And then
when things break down, you
identify that for fit, for,
to be fixed and actually
fix it. That's the problem
with like all of these
sort of failures that, that
I think of is that
I don't feel like they're
getting fixed, like me hanging
up on at and T
after an hour. I don't
think that now they know
I don't have voice over
IP and they need to
come and do something. I
had a, another funny UX
kind of situation. I, I
have files, right. It was
Verizon files and it became
frontier files similar to you
versus a package deal. And
I got rid of the
DVR, right. The TV recorder.
So I took it to
the video, the DV, you
know, the, the local files
company and said, here's my
DVR. And then I realized
that I had had actually
had two, I had one
in a spare bedroom. So
the next day, or the
next week I got the
second one, I went to
the office and it was
gone. Like it was empty.
It was just an empty,
the entire office had disappeared.
It was almost like one
of those movies where the
NSA had taken them all
away. So I called them
and told them that what
had happened and they didn't
believe me. They like, you
know, there's a disconnect again.
And, and, and then I
started, I said, well, you
send me a box and
then I will send you
back this DVR. So they
sent me a box and
I sent them back to
DVR every month for the
next two years, I got
an empty box to send
back the DVR because they
never got it. Right. So
God knows where the DVR
is. So after two years
of this and literally a
collection, a collection of cardboard,
I called them and said,
I don't have the DVR.
And they said, okay, that'll
be $300. Oh my goodness.
Isn't it. In UX, it
seems like the human gets
blamed for the problem. When
the system is so much
larger than the human, it's
so much more likely that
it's not my fault. Right.
It is so much. And
how much money did they
waste on you? I mean,
seriously. Yes. But that's sort
of the thing, like, I
feel like, well, the experiences,
app experiences, even enterprise application
experiences, the, the mantra of
UX has been very successful.
So you see a lot
more slicker interactions inside of
application sort of contained experiences.
But as an industry, we
need to work towards getting
that, raising that up, you
know, making it broader into
the entire experience because things
are only getting more complex,
complex. You're getting more devices
that are awesome on their
own, but as they fit
into the, your larger their
life, how do they work
together? What is that experience
like? Exactly. I think that
things are slicker and prettier
than ever before. And we
love to call that UX,
but I still had to
set up my nontechnical spouse's
iPhone, which is this supposed
to be the simplest device
on the planet. Right. But
it involved me logging into
iCloud, like 16 times. Oh,
don't get me started. Yeah.
So what do we tell
our listeners then who are
maybe going to their, their,
their, their big company job
right now? Do they, maybe
they don't even know if
they have a UX person
or maybe need to bring
a consultant in, Well, you
can always reach out to
me and I will help
you any way I can.
But the other thing is
just to ask around, ask
if there's some companies have
UX people, they call themselves
UX professionals. Some people, some
companies have human factors, engineers,
or industrial engineers. And while
their responsibilities may be slightly
different, they can at least
point you in the right
direction. Very cool. I'm going
to put in the show
notes, the links to send
to your strategic resources, which
is the, the UX and
human factors company that you
work out with a number
of other partners. And then
also some of your Google
scholar pages and your Twitter
as well. If you don't
mind, I don't mind. Thank
you very much, dr. Danielle Smith.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.